Update Great Expectations Guide (#253)
astronomer/airflow-guides: guides/airflow-great-expectations.md

## Overview

[Great Expectations](https://greatexpectations.io) is an open source Python-based data validation framework. It allows you to test your data by expressing what you “expect” from it as simple declarative statements in Python, then run validation using those “expectations” against datasets. The [Great Expectations team maintains an Airflow provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations) that gives users a convenient method for running validation directly from their DAGs. This guide will walk you through the usage of the [official `GreatExpectationsOperato`r](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations/modules/greatexpectationsoperator), usage of the [official `GreatExpectationsBigQueryOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations/modules/greatexpectationsbigqueryoperator), and provide some guidance on how to configure an Airflow DAG containing Great Expectations tasks to work with Airflow.

Typically, using Great Expectations is a two-step process:

1. Expectation Suite creation
2. Validation

> First, a user creates test suites, or “Expectation Suites”, using [Great Expectations methods](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/reference/expectations/expectations/). These suites are usually stored in JSON and can be checked into version control, just like regular tests. The suites are then loaded by the Great Expectations framework at test runtime, e.g. when processing a new batch of data in a pipeline. If you are using the [demo repository](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-data-quality-demo/) with this guide, then the example suite can be found under `include/great_expectations/expectations/taxi/demo.json`.

Reviewer: Removed the new line because it doesn't feel like the right place to introduce this information. If this is important, I would move the explanation of the demo contents closer to the use case.

> First, a user creates test suites, or “Expectation Suites”, using [Great Expectations methods](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/reference/expectations/expectations/). These suites are usually stored in JSON and can be checked into version control, just like regular tests. The suites are then loaded by the Great Expectations framework at test runtime, e.g. when processing a new batch of data in a pipeline. If you are using the [demo repository](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-data-quality-demo/) with this guide, then the example suite can be found under `include/great_expectations/expectations/taxi/demo.json`.

Author: Makes sense. There is actually a line at the end of the section mentioning where the whole Great Expectations project can be found, anyway.

This walkthrough assumes that you have either that you have downloaded the code from the [demo repository](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-data-quality-demo/), which contains a sample Great Expectations project already.

If you wish to use your own Great Expectations project along with this guide, ensure you have completed the following steps:

1. Initialized a Great Expectations project
2. Configured at least one Datasource `my_datasource`
3. Created at least one Expectation Suite `my_suite`
4. Optional: Created a Checkpoint `my_checkpoint`

If you set up a project manually, you will see a `great_expectations` directory which contains several sub-directories, as well as the `great_expectations.yml` configuration file. If you cloned the demo repository, the `great_expectations` directory can be found under `include/`.

> Note: If you are running Airflow 2.0 and beyond, you will need to also change the value of `enable_xcom_pickling` to `true` in your airflow.cfg. If you are using an Astronomer project structure, add `ENV AIRFLOW__CORE__ENABLE_XCOM_PICKLING=True` to your Dockerfile. The demo repository has this done for you.

## Use Case: Great Expectations Operator

> The `GreatExpectationsOperator` provides a convenient method for loading an existing Expectation Suite and using it to validate a batch of data. You can point the operator to any location by setting the `data_context_root_dir` parameter-- more on that below. This guide assumes you are using the [demo repository](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-data-quality-demo/), which has the following configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `GreatExpectationsOperator` provides a convenient method for loading an existing Expectation Suite and using it to validate a batch of data. You can point the operator to any location by setting the `data_context_root_dir` parameter (more on that to follow). Our [demo repository](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-data-quality-demo/) uses the following configuration:
```

> 1. The `great_expectations` directory is accessible by your DAG, as it is loaded into Docker as part of the `include` directory. Ideally the `great_expectations` directory should be located in the same project as your DAG, but you can point the environment variable at any location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `great_expectations` directory is accessible by your DAG, as it is loaded into Docker as part of the `include` directory. Ideally, the `great_expectations` directory should be located in the same project as your DAG, but you can point the environment variable at any location.
```

> 2. The Great Expectations provider is installed when you run `astro dev start`, as it is part of `requirements.txt`. Otherwise, install Great Expectations and the Great Expectations provider in your environment manually:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Great Expectations provider is installed when you run `astro dev start`, as it is part of `requirements.txt`. Otherwise, install Great Expectations and the Great Expectations provider in your environment manually:
```

Author: Are there specific times where we use a numbered list versus an unordered list?

    ```bash

>     pip install great_expectations airflow-provider-great-expectations

Reviewer: We start this list off as if it's a collection of configurations, but then we seemingly switch to telling the user how to start implementing the project. Can you announce one section for configuration and another section for user steps while making it clear which one is which?

> For a step-by-step guide on how to configure a simple Great Expectations project, please see the [“Getting started” tutorial](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/en/latest/guides/tutorials.html).

## Setup

This walkthrough assumes that you have downloaded the code from the [demo repository](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-data-quality-demo/) which contains a sample Great Expectations project.

If you wish to use your own Great Expectations project along with this guide, ensure you have completed the following steps:

1. Initialized a Great Expectations project
2. Configured at least one Datasource `my_datasource`
3. Created at least one Expectation Suite `my_suite`
4. Optional: Created a Checkpoint `my_checkpoint`

If you set up a project manually, you will see a `great_expectations` directory which contains several sub-directories, as well as the `great_expectations.yml` configuration file. If you cloned the demo repository, the `great_expectations` directory can be found under `include/`.

> > Note: If you are running Airflow 2.0 and beyond, you will need to also change the value of `enable_xcom_pickling` to `true` in your airflow.cfg. If you are using an Astronomer project structure, add `ENV AIRFLOW__CORE__ENABLE_XCOM_PICKLING=True` to your Dockerfile. The demo repository has this done for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: If you are running Airflow 2.0 and beyond, you will need to also change the value of `enable_xcom_pickling` to `true` in your airflow.cfg. If you are using an Astronomer project structure, add `ENV AIRFLOW__CORE__ENABLE_XCOM_PICKLING=True` to your Dockerfile. If you are working from the demo repository, this step has already been completed for you.
```

> ## Use Case: Great Expectations Operator

Reviewer: Headers with no content in can look a bit awkward on our site, can we add a short introduction here like:

"Now that we've set up our system to work with Great Expectations, we can start exploring how to use it in our DAGs. In this first use case, we'll use the `GreatExpectationsOperator` to run an Expectation Suite."

    from great_expectations_provider.operators.great_expectations import GreatExpectationsOperator
    ```

4. Create a task using the [`GreatExpectationsOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations/modules/greatexpectationsoperator).
5. When deploying with Astronomer, it's important to note that Great Expectations needs to know where to find the Data Context by setting the `data_context_root_dir`, which you can then access in the DAG. We recommend adding this variable to your Dockerfile, but you can use [any of the methods described in our docs](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/cloud/stable/deploy/environment-variables/) to set environment variables for your deployment. If you are using the demo repository, then this variable has already been set in the Dockerfile to the location described in step 1.

  ```shell
  ENV GE_DATA_CONTEXT_ROOT_DIR=/usr/local/airflow/include/great_expectations
  ```

The `GreatExpectationsOperator` supports multiple ways of invoking validation with Great Expectations:

- Using an Expectation Suite name and `batch_kwargs`.
- Using a list of Expectation Suite names and `batch_kwargs`.
- Using a Checkpoint.

> This means that the parameters you pass to the operator depend on how you would like to invoke Great Expectations validation. The example DAG below shows several different cases of using the operator as variations on the three cases listed above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The method you use for invoking validation determines which parameters you should pass to the operator. The following example DAG shows how you would implement each of these methods in your code:
```

        run_name="ge_airflow_run",
        checkpoint_name="taxi.fail.chk",
        fail_task_on_validation_failure=False
    )

    """
    #### This runs a checkpoint that will pass. Make sure the checkpoint yml file
         has the correct path to the data file
    """
    ge_checkpoint_pass = GreatExpectationsOperator(
        task_id="ge_checkpoint_pass",
        run_name="ge_airflow_run",
        checkpoint_name="taxi.pass.chk"
    )

    """
    #### This runs a checkpoint that will fail. Make sure the checkpoint yml file
         has the correct path to the data file
    """
    ge_checkpoint_fail = GreatExpectationsOperator(
        task_id="ge_checkpoint_fail",
        run_name="ge_airflow_run",
        checkpoint_name="taxi.fail.chk"
    )

    chain(
        ge_batch_kwargs_list_pass, ge_checkpoint_pass_root_dir, ge_batch_kwargs_pass,
        ge_checkpoint_fail_but_continue, ge_checkpoint_pass, ge_checkpoint_fail
    )
```

By default, a Great Expectations task will run validation and raise an `AirflowException` if any of the tests fail. To override this behavior and continue running even if tests fail, set the `fail_task_on_validation_failure` flag to `false`.

> For more information about possible parameters and examples, see the [README in the provider repository](https://github.com/great-expectations/airflow-provider-great-expectations), and the [example DAG in the provider package](https://registry.astronomer.io/dags/example-great-expectations-dag).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about possible parameters and examples, see the [README in the provider repository](https://github.com/great-expectations/airflow-provider-great-expectations) and the [example DAG in the provider package](https://registry.astronomer.io/dags/example-great-expectations-dag).
```

## Use Case: Great Expectations BigQuery Operator

> The [`GreatExpectationsBigQueryOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations/modules/greatexpectationsbigqueryoperator) allows you to run Great Expectation suites directly on tables in BigQuery, or on a subset of data chosen by a SQL query. The test suites are stored in Google Cloud Storage, so the entire process can run in the cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`GreatExpectationsBigQueryOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations/modules/greatexpectationsbigqueryoperator) allows you to run Great Expectation suites directly on tables in BigQuery or on a subset of data chosen by an SQL query. The test suites are stored in Google Cloud Storage, so the entire process can run in the cloud.
```

Author: Ha! Guess you read it as "es-que-el" and I read it as "sequel".

> Assuming you already have Airflow running in an Astronomer deployment in this directory, follow these steps to get the DAG working:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming you already have Airflow running in an Astronomer deployment, follow these steps to run the example DAG:
```

> 1. Under `Admin -> Connections` in the Airflow UI, add a new connection with `Conn ID` as `google_cloud_default`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the Airflow UI, go to **Admin** > **Connections** and add a new connection with `Conn ID` set to `google_cloud_default`.
```

> 2. Set the connection type to `Google Cloud`; this connection comes with the Astronomer Airflow distribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Set the connection type to `Google Cloud`. This connection type comes with the Astronomer Airflow distribution.
```

Reviewer: I this Astronomer Core? Maybe worth it to link out to our downloads page for AC here.

Author: I think it's just in the distribution that the Dockerfile uses. So not exactly sure what would be linked to here.

> 3. A GCP key associated with a service account that has access to BigQuery and Google Cloud Storage is needed. For more information generating a key, [follow the instructions in this guide](https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/creating-managing-service-account-keys). The key can either be added as a path via the `Keyfile Path` field, or the JSON contents can be directly copied and pasted into the `Keyfile JSON` field. In the case of the `Keyfile Path`, a relative path is allowed, and if using Astronomer, the recommended path is under the `include/` directory, as Docker will mount all files and directories under it. Make sure the file name is included in the path.

Reviewer: Let's create a new "Prerequisites" section to start with that includes:

- GCP key
- Astronomer Core Airflow distribution 

Then we can focus solely on adding the GCP key in this step.

It also doesn't seem like having an Airflow Deployment on Astronomer is necessary for these steps? We can include information on what to do if you have one, but I'd remove "Assuming you already have Airflow running in an Astronomer deployment"

Author: Sounds good. Yes I think I got the "Airflow running in an Astronomer deployment" confused with just "Running an Astronomer distribution of Airflow with the CLI".

4. Add the project ID to the `Project ID` field.

> 5. Scopes should be left blank, and filling the field in can result in token errors with Google Auth.

Reviewer: I would cut this step unless this is unexpected behavior. Even if it is, this is probably better off in a note

Author: I'd rather keep it as a note, because it can be a tricky issue to debug.

6. Add an environment variable to the project Dockerfile or `.env` file that points to your GCP key with permissions to read and write from Google Cloud Storage and BigQuery. The entry in the Dockerfile will look like:

  `ENV GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS=/usr/local/airflow/include/keys/your-google-cloud-key.json`

The connection should look like this:

> ![GCP Connection](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/great-expectations/gcp_connection.png)

Reviewer: Move this to before step 6? So they can confirm their setup before closing the UI and moving on to the env vars.

> Note: For more on configuring environment variables for any credentials required for external data connections, see the [Great Expectations documentation](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/en/latest/guides/how_to_guides/configuring_data_contexts/how_to_use_a_yaml_file_or_environment_variables_to_populate_credentials.html?highlight=environment%20variables), which provides an explanation on using environment variables for Datasource credentials in your `great_expectations.yml` configuration.

> With the connection to GCP set, the next step is creating and running the DAG. In the example below, the DAG performs all of the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the connection to GCP set, the next step is creating and running the DAG. In the example below, the DAG:
```

        gcp_project="{{ var.value.gcp_project_id }}",
        gcs_bucket=GCP_BUCKET,
        # GE will use a folder "$my_bucket/expectations"
        gcs_expectations_prefix="expectations",
        # GE will use a folder "$my_bucket/validations"
        gcs_validations_prefix="validations",
        # GE will use a folder "$my_bucket/data_docs"
        gcs_datadocs_prefix="data_docs",
        # GE will look for a file $my_bucket/expectations/taxi/demo.json
        expectation_suite_name="taxi.demo",
        table=BQ_TABLE,
        bq_dataset_name=BQ_DATASET,
        bigquery_conn_id="google_cloud_default"
    )

    """
    #### Delete test dataset and table
    Clean up the dataset and table created for the example.
    """
    delete_dataset = BigQueryDeleteDatasetOperator(
        task_id="delete_dataset",
        project_id="{{ var.value.gcp_project_id }}",
        dataset_id=BQ_DATASET,
        delete_contents=True
    )

    begin = DummyOperator(task_id="begin")
    end = DummyOperator(task_id="end")

    chain(begin, create_dataset, upload_taxi_data, transfer_taxi_data,
          upload_expectations_suite, ge_bigquery_validation, delete_dataset, end)
```

> The above example DAG shows how Airflow can be used to orchestrate in-depth data quality checks with Great Expectations as part of a full ELT pipeline. A next step is to configure the Great Expectations suite for your own use case, and let Airflow ensure your data quality checks run smoothly on any schedule.

Reviewer: How does it show that? Can we get a line that's like "When we run this DAG, we'll see that X happens." or "If we try to run this DAG with faulty data, Y happens".

Reviewer: Love the concluding sentence!
